---
geometry: margin=1.5in
header-includes:
  - \pagenumbering{gobble}
---

# October 5th: Decidability and Recognizability

If language $L$ is decidible, both $L$ and $\overline{L}$ are recognizable.

To prove that $L$ is unrecognizable, we have 2 options:

1. Reduce $L$ to another unrecognizable language
2. Show that $L$ is undecidable and $\overline{L}$ is recognizable

Dovetailing is a fun trick where we don't run a Machine on one string at a time, but instead run one step on a bunch of strings at once. This avoids getting stuck in an infinite loop which would prevent us from processing the next string. We can actually do this on a countably infinite number of strings! We just need to be able to order the cases.

## Problem 1

Prove that $\text{E}_{\text{TM}}$ is unrecognizable.

$$\text{E}_{\text{TM}} = \{\langle M \rangle \mid M \text{ is a TM and } L(M) \text{ is } \emptyset\}$$

Assume for the sake of contradiction that $\text{E}_{\text{TM}}$ is undecidable. We also know $\overline{\text{E}}_{\text{TM}}$ is undecidable.

$$\overline{\text{E}}_{\text{TM}} = \{\langle M \rangle \mid M \text{ is a TM where } M \text{ accepts at least one string}\}$$

We construct a recognizer $\text{R}_{\text{E}}$ which recognizes any $\langle M \rangle \in \overline{\text{E}}_{\text{TM}}$ as so:

- Given $M$, $\text{R}_{\overline{\text{E}}}$ runs as follows...
  - Have some method of enumerating all possible inputs for $M$
  - Simulate $M$ on first string for one step
  - Simulate $M$ on the first string for two steps, and the second string for one step.
  - Simulate $M$ on first string for three steps, the second string for two steps, and the third string for one step.
- Continue this process until $M$ accepts a string.

If $\langle M \rangle \in \overline{\text{E}}_{\text{TM}} \longrightarrow M$ accepts some string. Then, by dovetailing, we will eventually simulate $M$ on that string, which means that we will eventually accept that Machine

If $\langle M \rangle \notin \overline{\text{E}}_{\text{TM}} \longrightarrow$ We will simulate $M$ on inputs forever.

$\text{R}_{\overline{\text{E}}}$ is a recognizer for $\overline{\text{E}}_{\text{TM}}$

But then if $\text{E}_{\text{TM}}$ is recognizable and $\overline{\text{E}}_{\text{TM}}$ is recognizable, $\text{E}_{\text{TM}}$ would be decidible. $\text{E}_{\text{TM}}$ is not decidible.

$$\Longrightarrow \Longleftarrow$$

Thus, $\text{E}_{\text{TM}}$ is unrecognizable.

\pagebreak

## Problem 2

Prove that

$$\text{L{}} = \{\langle M \rangle \mid M \text{ accepts one of the following strings "101", "001", "111"}\}$$

if undecidable.
